---
layout: post
title: "Lambda Days"
status: draft
type: post
published: released
draft: true
comments: true
---

<a href="http://www.lambdadays.org/lambdadays2017"> Lambda Days </a> took place during 8-9 February 2017 in Cracow. As Cracow is our home city we ofcourse couldn't stop ourselves from taking a part in this event.

<!--more-->

## What are Lambda Days?

If you are asking yourself that question, you have been probably living under a rock or something. Jokes aside, Lambda Days is conference that happens anually and attracts a lot of functional programmers.

As organizers say:

> Lambda Days is a one of a kind experience in the functional world.
> Never-failing explosion of enthusiasm and talent is what gets us motivated to explore this amazing community in all of its potential.
> A journey we take through different ideas, technologies, paradigms and languages inspires creativity, growth and pure enjoyment of coding.

And it is totally true. There is no other place event where Scala, F# and Erlang/Elixir developers cooexist peacefully.

## Keynotes

I have to say that variety of keynotes really overwhelmed me. From representing of positive integers (<a href="Why Functional Programming Matters"> Why functional programming matters</a> by John Hughes and Mary Sheeran) as functions and beautiful Haskel errors (a.k.a. several A4 pages of `t => t`) to representing stock prices as wall of penises. (Ain't joking here... <a href="#">Embodied Interactions </a>) Especially interesting was keynote titled `Build Good Software: Of Politics and Methods`. It was briefly describing destructive consequences of bad design and overcomplicating software. That's too bad that Java decelopers hadn't chance to see it...

I really think that John Hughes should have been awarded with title of attention thief. Each time when he was taking over the presentation I really was starting to pay attention. That was probably happening because of his gesticulation and voice modulation (high pitch accents on important and usually kind of funny elements).

## Building Systems of Tommorow

Were you aware of that in Germany there was developped a system to automatically send money to unemployed? Neither do I. And now I know why. Kind Ms. Txus Bach was talking about software development mess ups and how to prevent them. Because at the end no bug was made on purpose. Main core of his presentation was idea of how static typing can help us preventing such errors. He stated that tightening domain of your functions can help you prevent mistakes. And to be honest I can totally agree with him.

TODO:
  - What we've seen, aka best talks
  - People we have met
  - Impact on our life and projects

Talks:
  - Elm, PureScript
  - ClojureScript and native
    Because I dont like js and want to take advantage of ecosystem
  - First Keynote
  - Open Source Consequences
  - Building the systems of tomorrow
    The part about fuckups
  - Elixir and Money
    Let it crash properly explained
    Event sourcing but not
